>> Germs, bugs, thousands of
organisms are all around you
all the time.
That remote control
you're holding,
it's teeming with life,
bacteria, and other organisms.
>> Yuck!
>> Your microbiome.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> I have no idea
what a microbe is.
>> Something small.
>> It's-- it's micro.
>> I'm a man with
a huge world view.
I'm surrounded by microbes.
>> What am I?
>> You're the Helicobacter
pylori bacterium.
>> I want you to smell
yourselves, noses and armpits.
That is the smell
of your microbiome.
>> Microbiome?
>> Like a hotel for microbes?
>> Everybody, head
for the colon!
>> Then we get to
the large intestine.
>> They could be good.
They could be bad.
They're good and bad.
>> It all depends
on which one it is.
>> Well, young man, the truth is
we still don't know a lot about
the microbiome, but you
shouldn't let it freak you out.
>> My name is Maria
Gloria Dominguez-Bello.
People call me Gloria.
I'm a Microbiologist.
And my job is to study microbes,
the tiny organisms that
live inside us.
People hate germs,
another word for microbes,
but all life evolved from
them, and most are actually
good for us.
We call the ones
living inside us
our microbiome, a collection of
bacteria, viruses, and fungi.
They are involved in almost
everything our bodies do.
Microbes help us digest
food and make vitamins.
They train the immune system
to protect us against invaders.
They also determine, to
some extent, our response
to pain and our mood.
These discoveries have started
a scientific revolution.
But just as we are learning
how important they are,
our microbes are disappearing.
>> We have lost maybe as
much as 50% of our internal
biodiversity, and
this has consequences.
My name is Martin Blaser.
I'm a Professor of
Medicine and Microbiology.
>> Can I get a picture?
>> Yeah.
>> Over these last 20 years,
I've been thinking about this
idea, which I call the theory
of disappearing microbiota.
I wrote "Missing Microbes"
to sound an alarm.
>> Dr. Martin Blaser is the
author of "Missing Microbes."
>> Please welcome to the
program Martin Blaser.
Sir!
[APPLAUSE]
>> What's happening to our
internal ecology is very
similar to what's
happening to our climate.
But unfortunately, this
is happening even faster.
For decades now we have
seen many diseases rising,
and it's happening just as
we are losing our microbes.
>> Nearly 26 million people
in the US are living with
diabetes.
>> Why so many food allergies?
>> Asthma rates
rising dramatically.
>> More than 2/3 of Americans
are overweight or obese.
>> We're in the middle
of an extinction crisis.
It's invisible.
It's deadly.
And it's happening in
all of us right now.
People have been
worried about disease
since the beginning of time.
One of the most important
advances in human health
is having clean water.
And that has been
amazing because we
have less typhoid fever,
we have less cholera,
many other infections.
It was part of a revolution that
started about 200 years ago.
Scientists like Pasteur
discovered that many diseases
are caused by germs.
That was a tremendous
breakthrough.
We found ways that we
could fight these germs,
through sanitation, vaccines,
and through antibiotics.
And those were
remarkable victories.
Instead of knowing that if you
had five children, two of them
were going to die
in childhood, you
had the chance that all your
children were going to survive.
>> I went down to the library
to find out something else about
this field of antibiotics.
>> Antibiotics reached the
general public around 1945,
starting with penicillin and
then expanding from there.
>> America is continually
increasing its output
of penicillin, the new drug
that effects almost miraculous
cures.
>> It was the era of Superman.
During World War II,
when we beat our enemies,
we were invincible.
>> It's Superman!
>> These invaluable products
have been responsible
for saving millions
of human lives.
>> But we didn't understand that
there could be costs as well.
>> Why are so many chronic
diseases increasing so fast?
We seek answers in places where
the problem hasn't yet begun,
where we work with people who
live more like our ancestors did.
Venezuela is my
country of birth.
For over 20 years, I've
been returning there
and making trips to
villages deep in the jungle.
Sometimes, we are the first
Western doctors and scientists
they've ever met, and we
take that responsibility
very seriously because we
are aware of the history
of exploitation.
The villagers'
traditional lifestyle
is a safe place
for their microbes.
They don't have chlorinated
water or pasteurized milk.
Their foods are never processed.
They have low exposure to
chemicals and antibiotics.
All of this keeps their
microbiome healthy and rich.
Everyone's eating fruit.
Our kids grew up eating
what I plant.
>> We explained to the villagers
that they have more microbial
diversity than us and there is
much we can learn from them.
(WOMEN SPEAKING
IN YANOMAMÖ LANGUAGE)
Karawasoma?
They're not here.
Calme?
She's here. Carmen.
Ah, Carmen, Carmen.
They will take samples
from your mouth.
>> When we ask them
for stool samples...
Can you bring that poop sample here?
...sometimes they
laugh and they say,
did you come all this
way just to see my poop?
And we say, yes, because
your poop contains trillions
of tiny organisms
that may help us
find the answers to some of
the world's biggest health problems.
This is also important
for them because they
are integrating very fast.
So studying their
microbes before they
lose them is a
race against time.
>> [SPEAKING YANOMAMÖ]
>> The samples are kept at
minus 80 degrees and transported
to Caracas until they
can be sent to the US.
Then we study them in the
lab and store them safely
for the future.
[SINGING IN SPANISH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, Ingsheng.
Hi, Antonia.
>> Good morning.
>> These are all off
one side in the Amazon.
Ever since I was a little kid,
I wanted to be a scientist.
My childhood in Venezuela
was a happy life,
close to nature with farm
animals, fruits, and trees.
One year, my parents
gave me a chemistry set.
I loved the colorful
powders and smelly liquids.
Our second bathroom was my lab,
and nobody could enter there.
I went to university in Caracas.
In grad school, I studied
how cows can eat toxic plants
and survive.
And that's when I got interested
in how microbes affect us.
In Venezuela, I had
Adriana in 1991.
Allow me to introduce Adriana.
>> Then I moved to
New York in 2012.
This is not the
traditional way, of course.
Want to try?
I'm making more.
>> Mmm.
That's delicious.
>> We met through work.
I work with his colleagues.
>> On her last day,
I had just come back,
and we met really
for 10 minutes.
And then we actually
started doing work together.
We collaborated together.
>> Are you leaving?
>> No, you are.
>> I'm leaving in one minute.
>> I was divorced, and we
started a friendship that ended
in a deeper relation.
>> NYU Hospital here in
Manhattan was plunged
into darkness, its
generators failing.
>> We were getting very close,
and then came Hurricane Sandy.
I was the Chief of
Medicine at NYU.
I got a phone call that said we
have to evacuate the hospital.
And she said, well, if you're
going, I'm going with you.
We came home.
It was early in the morning.
And I thought to
myself, who would I
rather spend my life with?
So that's when I
proposed to Gloria.
>> I didn't ask him
to go on his knee.
[CHUCKLING]
But I said yes.
Don't touch my hand
in public, Marty.
>> Why not?
[CHUCKLES]
I was a city kid.
I grew up in Queens.
I've kind of been
exploring all my life.
I rode on freight
trains, in boxcars.
They say that the
first time you pee off
the side of a boxcar
you're hooked.
Actually, I wanted to
become an architect,
but I discovered
at a very early age
that I had no talent for that.
I went into the specialty of
infectious diseases trying
to solve very complex problems,
patients who are very ill.
I was really interested
in questioning why.
And at a certain
point, I found out
that I could answer some
of my own questions,
and that was very exciting.
>> So are you going to
the VA first or Bellevue?
>> Bellevue.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I believe the
hypothesis is correct,
that antibiotics are
contributing to the rise of all
these diseases.
But not everybody
believes that's correct.
And so the job of a scientist
is to examine questions and see
if we can find more
evidence that it's true
and try to understand
the details.
Maybe it's true for some
diseases, but not others.
And that's why we do
experiments in the lab
to try to understand,
how does it work?
What are the mechanisms?
What's the percent
difference in weight there?
These guys got the antibiotic
and then the bacteria.
>> Yeah.
>> And these guys got the
bacteria, no antibiotic.
>> When I compare the oral and
nasal microbiome of Amerindians
to Westernized subjects, there's
a clear distinction between
the microbiomes.
>> And I don't think that
has ever been shown before.
>> Yeah.
>> We've been
studying metabolism.
We've been studying immunity
and the propensity for asthma.
>> And the two next phases.
>> Poop.
>> Yes, poop.
>> I'm going to wash my hands.
So the papers were accepted and
they were published yesterday.
>> Yay.
[CHEERING]
>> And our two main topics
in the lab are obesity
and diabetes.
If you compare people
with type 2 diabetes
to people who don't
have type 2 diabetes,
who had been more
exposed to antibiotics?
And the answer is people with
diabetes, significantly more.
And to me, these numbers
are not just a coincidence.
Diabetes is a disease
in which there's
too much sugar in the
blood and a lot of that
has to do with obesity.
In societies, whenever
there's more obesity,
there's more type II diabetes.
Obesity is such a huge problem.
And it has been
growing dramatically.
And the current
hypothesis about obesity,
about calories, et
cetera, are important,
but they're not sufficient to
explain why this has occurred.
It's now been 70 years
since farmers discovered
that if they gave antibiotics
to their farm animals,
they would fatten them up.
And the earlier in
life they started it,
the more profound the effect.
>> Some antibiotics added to the
feed of young animals promote
more rapid growth.
The larger pig was raised on
feed containing an antibiotic.
The other, from the
same litter, was not.
>> All of a sudden,
it occurred to me,
maybe the use of antibiotics
early in life in our children
is fattening up our kids.
And so we began to
do studies in mice.
And our results were
quite consistent,
that if we give antibiotics
to mice, they become fat.
If we put mice on a high
calorie diet, they become fat.
And if we put them on both
together, they become very fat.
And so all of this made me
ask, how else could antibiotics
be affecting our kids?
>> Hi, guys.
How are you?
>> How are you doing?
>> Good.
Hi.
>> You want some coffee?
>> Yes, please.
>> Great.
>> When she was in her 20s,
my daughter Genia picked up
a parasitic infection.
>> I was in Peru.
I had some ceviche.
And then when I returned to
the US, a couple of days later,
I was having digestive symptoms.
And I was prescribed a dosage
of a powerful antibiotic that
basically just clears
out your system.
And then over the
following two years,
five or six other
prescriptions as I
continued to have
stomach symptoms.
That's when we were
able to figure out
that I had celiac, that I
have this gluten allergy.
>> To understand my ideas about
what happened to Genia we have
to go back years before
she ever went to Peru.
When she was a young girl,
she had many ear infections.
And like millions of parents,
we took her to the doctor.
And each time, the doctor
prescribed antibiotics.
And to me, that combination
of those early childhood
antibiotics and those
later antibiotics,
that's kind of what led you to
this problem, which, of course,
I feel terrible about.
Early life, that's when
they're developing.
They're developing
their immunity.
their metabolism.
They're developing
their brain function.
That's the critical time.
And that's the
time when kids are
getting the most antibiotics.
We thought we were
doing you a favor.
I remember thinking, if
we put you on antibiotics,
you wouldn't have to
have tubes in your ears.
But in retrospect, it
would have been better.
But we didn't know it.
There's a conversation going
on between our microbes
and our immune system,
especially in young children,
where the microbes
train the immune system
to distinguish friend from foe.
I believe that antibiotics
disrupt that communication.
And that's what opened the
door to Genia developing
celiac disease later in life.
>> And then I remembered that
I hated taking antibiotics,
and you and mom basically bribed
me that if I would take it
without complaining for like a
week or so, I could get my ears
pierced.
>> Bribing you to take
your antibiotic is--
>> I know.
Mom apologized to me for it.
>> About half of all pregnant
women are receiving antibiotics
at some time during
their pregnancy.
And for kids in
the United States,
by the time they're
two, they've had
on average about three
courses of antibiotics.
By the time they're 10, about
10 courses of antibiotics.
So many of these chronic
diseases began in childhood.
That's why it's become
a focus of our work.
But an out of balance microbiome
can have repercussions
at any point in life.
>> In 2010, I ended
up getting C-diff.
And it was horrible.
>> C. Difficile is a bacteria
that is resistant to most
antibiotics.
And some experts
say over-prescribing
the medications is causing the
bacteria to become even more
deadly.
>> It's called C-diff.
500,000 Americans have
it in their bodies.
15,000 people die
from it every year.
>> I was constantly sick.
I would be afraid to eat
because anything I would eat
would just come right out.
So it would limit what I
wanted to do, where I would go.
I was very, very fatigued.
I ended up going
to a GI specialist
out here in Rhode Island.
And she said that
she was starting
to do these fecal transplants.
>> FMT stands for Fecal
Microbiota Transplant.
It means taking the microbes
from someone who's healthy
and transferring them over
to someone who's sick.
Right now, the only way to do
this is by using their poop.
The idea that giving somebody
poop could cure their illness
is a pretty amazing thought.
But more than half of poop
is actually living microbes.
So fecal transplant
provides a patient
a wide range of
microbes intended
to restore balance in
the gut and to cure
the C-diff infection.
>> I used my daughter
as the donor.
She was 15.
Eew!
Mom, Eew!
The day of the procedure,
I was so afraid
she wouldn't be able
to use the bathroom.
So I loaded her up
with milk of magnesia.
So she came home from school
and she's like, mom, I
was in the bathroom all day.
So she was not happy.
I would go in and I would do
kind of like a colonoscopy.
So they would liquefy the feces
and go up through the anus
and into the intestinal tract
and kind of just with a syringe
push all that fluid in.
And like this, it
was instant relief.
>> FMT is a complex mixture,
and we don't even know what all
the components are.
It's FDA approved only to
treat C-diff infections,
but for that, it's
very effective.
The benefit of it is much
greater than the risk.
>> Hey, honey.
>> Hey, babe.
>> Honey, you didn't have
to do this on your day off.
Oh, I love it.
About six months after
I had the procedure,
I started noticing
a weight gain.
So this one here was 2005.
And then this one
was me in 2006.
>> That's the best one.
>> Yeah, that's his favorite.
So this is me literally
right before the FMT.
And then this is me--
it was like six months later.
So I went from being 120
pounds like my whole life to--
at my highest, I was 183.
So I put on 60 pounds
within like a year.
And nothing had
changed in my life.
So for me, I'm like,
why is this increase
in weight gain happening?
The only thing that
made sense to me
was the FMT procedure caused it.
>> OK.
More mice.
We did another experiment
where we took mice
that we made fat
with antibiotics,
and we gave their
microbes to mice that
had no microbes of their own.
And those mice got fat too.
And that showed us that
the altered microbes
were causing the weight gain.
>> My daughter, she is obese.
She's shaped-- we're shaped
just like each other, round.
So looking at my
daughter's body,
and my body had to
have been from the FMT.
How was school?
Where's my love?
Give me my love.
I've done Weight Watchers.
I did a liquid diet that's
done through Miriam Hospital.
So it's like medically
done with doctors.
I've tried so many diets.
I'm active.
I don't binge eat.
So for me, it's
frustrating when I'm
doing everything I can
to try to lose the weight
and I still can't
lose the weight.
>> Several years ago, the
first project that we did was
on artificial sweeteners.
And to make a long story
short, what we showed
is that consumption of
artificial sweeteners
can alter the microbiome
in a detrimental way.
>> That's the--
big, massive bell.
>> Uh-huh.
Oh, OK.
>> So microbiome and diet.
How did you first get
involved in this field?
>> I got into reading about
diet for marathon running.
And then I realized that a
lot of the things that people
tell us you should
eat for training
have no scientific basis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I started reading about
nutrition and thinking about
differences between people, I
realized that everything you
put in your body has an effect
on your gut bacteria and that
our gut bacteria may really have
a dominant role in all these
big questions I was asking,
like why some of us become obese
or develop diabetes
while others don't.
>> I was performing
colonoscopies and endoscopies
every day of the week.
I was meeting the
microbiome on a daily basis,
but at that time, we all thought
that this was a waste product,
that it was just something
that we had to live with
but was not really
important to our physiology
or to our health.
But as we matured as
a field, we realized
that the functions these
microbes provide are important.
And this was a conceptual
change in the field.
I do microbiome
research while my wife
is an infectious
disease specialist.
So there are many
discussions over dinner
related to human excretions
that are not entirely proper.
>> I brought you a new
sample for the study.
>> In many cases,
my kids tell me,
we don't want to hear any more
about your work, your science,
and about poop.
>> We thought that
working together,
it could lead to
something very fruitful.
>> Fresh strawberries!
>> The first idea was
related to nutrition.
I often met patients suffering
of obesity, of type 2 diabetes.
I always gave the gold standard
recommendations, the American
Heart Association and American
Diabetes Association diets,
but the nutritional
recommendations in reality
never really worked for
most of these individuals.
>> We began to wonder if these
diets failed because they were
ignoring the role gut microbes
play in how we digest our food
and how every person has
different microbes inside them.
>> We'd asked 1,000 individuals
to give us a week of his or her
life.
We collected lots
of information.
They were giving us blood
tests in which we measured
many different parameters.
>> For dozens of different
small and large meals,
you log everything that you eat.
>> And we took stool samples
from each of these individuals
in order to characterize
their gut microbes,
their composition,
their function,
their genomic content,
and many other features.
>> Crunching all this data, we
created a program that could
identify which foods made each
person's blood sugar levels
rise and which brought
them back to normal.
We also learned
that the way foods
are paired is very important
for avoiding sugar spikes.
For instance, bread
may be bad for someone,
but not when they
combine it with butter.
Or an apple may
cause sugar spikes,
but not when they
eat it with walnuts.
We then designed
personalized diets
for participants
with pre-diabetes
based on their gut microbes.
And the results were
actually quite remarkable.
We were able for almost
all of these participants
to fully normalize to perfectly
healthy their blood glucose
levels.
And as a happy side effect,
they also lost about 10 pounds
on average over 6 months.
And when we analyzed the
changes in the gut bacteria,
we were able to detect shifts
in the microbiome following
these dietary interventions.
Bacteria associated
with diabetes
tended, on average, to go
down in their levels in most
participants.
Perhaps their gut
bacteria may be
changing to a more
beneficial composition.
That, of course,
needs to be verified
in longer term trials, which we
are actually engaged in today.
>> And now we have a great
opportunity to pinpoint which
are the bacteria inside this
huge neighborhood of bacteria
that resides within us that are
actually doing the good stuff.
And this, in the
future, could actually
mean that we may have a
capability in complementing
the dietary approach with next
generation probiotics that
are actually able to drive
normalizing blood sugar levels
and even reducing weight.
>> That's an important goal
because many of the probiotics
that are actually in use today
haven't really been vetted
by science.
Some people experience
real benefits,
but most are untested.
What Eran Elinav calls
next generation probiotics
I call targeted
probiotics, the idea
that we could use specific
bacteria for specific purposes.
Such bacteria could provide
answers for other health issues
that currently don't have
great treatment options.
>> You see him get it I remember
having to go to birthday
parties and having to miss
out on pizza, the cake,
maybe ice cream, and I would
have to bring my own things.
>> He was having a
difficult time eating,
even right at birth
in the hospital.
It was tough to
keep anything down
and he would just
projectile vomit.
And his face almost
completely swelled up.
His eyes swelled shut.
He would have tears
rolling down his eyes.
But that was before we knew that
he was a truly allergic kid.
>> Nuts, milk, wheat, soy,
sesame, pretty much everything,
it feels like.
Your mouth starts to tingle
and feels really bad.
And then your body
starts getting all lumpy.
And then it starts bleeding
from like all the bumpy hives.
It's not a good--
pretty sight at all.
>> The first time I got the
call they were in the ambulance,
that was hard.
Stuck at work.
>> I'll never forget this.
I remembered this the other day.
It was probably one
of the worst days.
He was about five or
six, and he was crying.
And you can just kind of
see this light bulb go off
in his head.
And he said, I'm never going to
get better, this is how I am,
and it's never
going to get better,
I'm never going to be
like everybody else.
And he was just crying.
And he said, why did
God do this to me?
There was nothing.
There was nothing for him.
And every day he
seemed to get worse.
>> Food allergy is a condition
in which there is a change
in the immune system in
the gut and also a change
in the microbiome.
My lab has shown that
children with food allergy
have bacterial microbes that
are different from those
of healthy children.
We found that one
bacterium in particular
called subdoligranulum variabile
were either severely depleted
or missing in children
with food allergy
and that this bacterium
protects against food allergy.
So in mice, treatment with this
bacterium cures food allergy.
We should be able to translate
these results to therapies
for people with food allergy.
Can this happen in
the next decade?
Absolutely.
>> Here you go, bud.
>> OK, thank you.
>> Right now, the magnitude of
the problem is so huge that we
have to investigate alternative
approaches to therapy such
as giving small amounts of
the allergic foods to build up
tolerance.
>> There they are.
>> Hello.
>> Hi, guys.
>> Hi, Amy.
>> How was your week?
>> Good.
>> Come on in.
>> I'm Amy Thieringer.
And I am an innovative
Nutritionist and Health Coach.
My goal and my mission is to
help as many kids as I can.
>> Pick a movie.
Any environmental
stuff this week, Ruby?
>> He just sneezed a couple
of times, mostly just sniffy.
>> OK.
It's really difficult
preparing yourself to start
having exposure to the food.
They watch a video
because I don't want them
thinking about what I'm doing.
And I put a poppy seed-sized
speck on their chin.
And I leave it on there for
2 minutes and all is well.
The next time they
come in, I put it
on the middle of their lip.
And then they will lick it.
And they do it at home every
day and they increase the amount
very slowly.
We're going to do three
tabs of the cashews.
They are so anxious
about these foods
that they go into
this heightened state
and they can have a full
blown anaphylactic reaction.
So we give them tools to help
calm that anxiety response.
OK, and if he gets a little
nervous, we do our tapping
and say our mantra.
Remember, Amy taught
you a new mantra?
>> Oh, yeah.
I am safe.
I am happy.
I am free.
I'm safe.
I'm happy.
I'm free.
I am safe.
I am happy.
I am free.
I am safe.
I'm happy.
I am free.
>> There you go.
It's really difficult, but
just to see where he started
and where he is right now.
What was it?
Five months ago you had
cashews and we ended up
in the hospital.
Now look at him.
He's had three cashews.
>> Using small amounts of
allergic foods to build up
tolerance is effective in
decreasing allergic reactions,
but in most cases,
it's not a cure.
But the important
thing is that we
can use the gut
microbes to retrain
the immune system of
patients with food allergies.
¿Adriana, do you love me?
Adriana was quite an
allergic kid and still is.
I brought Adriana to my office
when she was three weeks.
I couldn't stand being at
home watching her asleep,
but I couldn't leave her either
because I couldn't concentrate.
I grew up with her in the lab.
When I was little, I used to
play with her leftover dolphin
stomachs and pretend
I was a scientist.
>> [PLAYING AND SINGING IN SPANISH]
>> I still get allergies
to dust and season changes.
>> And you had reflux.
>> And I had reflux.
>> Pretty bad.
My daughter was
born by C-section.
And C-section are very useful.
They save lives.
In the US about a 1/3 of the
babies are born by C-section,
but we know in many cases they
are not medically indicated.
There is a difference
between babies born vaginally
and babies born by C-section.
C-section babies
have higher rates
of asthma, allergies,
diabetes, obesity,
and many other illnesses.
The question is why?
The womb is mostly
free of microbes.
So when the babies
are born vaginally,
they first get covered
with the mother's microbes
as they move down
the birth canal.
These bugs become the starter
of their own microbiome.
But babies born by C-section
only get their first microbes
from the operating room.
My hypothesis is
that this puts them
at a disadvantage from day one.
>> [SINGING LULLABY IN SPANISH]
>> Correct me if I'm wrong, but
you started delving into this
field and then there was
this moment of looking back
and saying, what if I
didn't need that C-section?
>> I was a victim of the
persuasion by the doctor that I
was too narrow, that
the baby's head was big.
And at the end, she wasn't
big, she was normal,
her head was normal,
and I'm not narrow.
And then I found out that in
my hospital, 50% of the women
had C-sections.
They just simply don't know
that the kids born by C-section
are not the same.
I think these guys--
[SNEEZES]
--truly-- bless you.
>> Allergies.
[CHUCKLES]
>> An important question is,
can we restore the microbial
diversity that is lost
in C-section births?
And if so, will that lower the
risk of these chronic diseases?
Nice to see you again.
Wow.
So, ready?
>> Yeah.
>> Great.
We began a study of C-sections
where we cover babies
with their mom's vaginal fluid.
An hour before the
operation, we fold
a sterile gauze like
a tampon and insert it
in the vaginal canal.
Using a tampon.
You have the gauze?
>> I got it.
>> The gauze is
the most important.
>> What gauze?
[CHUCKLES]
>> Yeah, this is--
here's the gauze.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So the gauze is the
first, and then he
will examine, and
then the swabbing.
>> It's a girl.
>> Later, when we
examined their poop,
we found that their microbiomes
look more like in those babies
born vaginally.
>> Bye.
I hope you had
everything you needed.
I hope it went well.
>> Yes, perfect.
Thank you so much.
>> Good.
Have a great day.
>> Thank you.
>> There are many ways to
boost good microbes in babies,
but the most important
one is breastfeeding.
No matter how they
are born, it's
associated with a decrease
in those diseases.
Swabbing can help restore
C-section babies' microbes.
But right now, it's not safe
outside clinical trials.
So it's going to take
years before we know
if it reduces disease rates.
And by then, we may
already have better ways
to restore microbiomes.
>> My doctor called
and said, wow,
a colleague of mine is doing
this clinical trial in Boston
at Mass General, and
they're doing FMTs,
but they're doing this to see
if there's a correlation between
the gut flora and obesity
and how it affects the whole
system.
>> All right, what do you think?
>> 200.
>> OK.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, maybe less than that.
So 199.
Any fevers at all?
>> No.
>> The microbiome is still an
unexplored space that we know
so little about.
>> We are conducting a trial in
24 obese subjects to determine
whether changing the type of gut
bacteria that the obese study
subjects have can potentially
change their body weight
and also their metabolism.
>> OK, so are you ready?
>> I'm ready.
>> All right, so I'm just going
to warm them up a little bit.
And each one with a
big, big gulp of water.
>> The participant will be
receiving capsules that are
created with donor material,
stool samples essentially from
lean, metabolically
healthy donors.
Whenever you propose
giving someone
a capsule which
contains stool material,
there could be potentially
a yuck factor associated
with that and some hesitation.
>> Oh, you do two at a time.
>> Yeah.
>> Wow.
>> 15 pills is a lot of pills.
So if I can do two
at a time, I will.
I told my husband,
I said, honey,
you can actually see it's brown.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's like you're
literally swallowing shit.
>> I've heard every
poop joke there is.
Crap-sules is the
most common one.
It just sort of
rolls off the tongue.
>> The trial is designed so that
12 subjects will be receiving
the active capsules and the
other 12 will be receiving
a placebo capsule with
an inert substance.
>> Our goal was to make the
placebo pills look as close
to the real capsules
as possible.
And we ended up finding
that just regular old cocoa
powder with some gelatin
added was the best.
They're very good placebos.
Honestly, I cannot
tell the difference.
>> Whoa.
I love you.
Mommy missed you today.
I am very productive
and very busy.
So the weight affects that too.
Because I'm doing 12-hour
shifts on my feet as a nurse,
I feel it, my feet,
my calves, chub rub.
So the thighs rub.
This clinical trial
is something that
could be so huge
for so many people,
not just obesity, people with
Crohn's, colitis, diabetes,
and high blood pressure
and cholesterol.
But for me personally,
it's hoping
to get back down to
my normal weight.
>> Theresa's medical issues
began when she developed
a C-diff infection that couldn't
be treated with antibiotics.
And this brings
up another threat
that comes from the
overuse of antibiotics,
antibiotic resistant bacteria.
A healthy microbiome is one
with a wide variety of microbes
all balancing each other.
But after we carpet-bomb
our microbes,
some that are resistant to the
antibiotic survive and they
multiply.
And this can make the antibiotic
less likely to work next time.
>> 70% to 80% of all the
antibiotics used in the United
States are used on the farm,
and our meat is a little cheaper
as a result. But
there's a disadvantage.
Those animals are carrying
resistant bacteria,
and there's a lot of
evidence that these now
are being transferred
over to people.
>> Drug-resistant diseases claim
the lives of around 700,000
people each year.
Now, that's expected to
leap to 10 million by 2050.
Compare that with today's
deaths from cancer, 8.2 million
each year.
>> Antibiotic resistance is one
of the biggest health threats
we have around the world.
The COVID pandemic
has been devastating,
but a pandemic of drug-resistant
bacteria could be even worse.
It could sweep through the
population just like COVID-19.
It's what I've called
antibiotic winter.
You remember those
Roadrunner cartoons
where they're racing
along the plateau
and you can see that
there's a cliff ahead?
And you're wondering, when
are they going to slow down
or are they going to
go over the cliff?
I was appointed to chair
the President's Advisory
Council to combat antibiotic
resistance bacteria.
And our mandate is
to provide advice
to the Secretary of
Health and Human Services
to the President of
the United States
about how to control
antibiotic resistance.
>> It's an opportunity to tackle
a big problem that is big now
and threatens to become
much worse unless we can do
something about it.
>> Good morning.
My name is Alicia Cole.
And I'm a survivor of
sepsis pseudomonas,
MRSA, VRE, and
necrotizing fasciitis.
>> Alicia contracted
those deadly bacteria,
as so many people
do, in the hospital.
After the infection
started, the antibiotics
they gave her couldn't
stop its spread.
The infection was spreading
about an inch every hour.
I have never felt that kind
of pain ever in my life.
Many people don't
survive battles
with antibiotic-resistant bugs.
I'm so lucky.
>> All of modern medicine is
based on having antibiotics
that work.
If we don't have antibiotics
that work, surgery becomes
too risky, transplantation
becomes too risky,
chemotherapy becomes too risky.
And if they stop working
because of resistance,
all these things go away.
The solution is that we have to
steward our antibiotics better.
We have to use them
only when they're needed
and not when they're not.
We have to devote
sufficient resources
to deal with this problem,
not just in the US,
but everywhere in the world.
That's one of the goals
of the Advisory Council.
>> I remind everybody that
microbes do not respect
political boundaries.
>> 60,000 newborns a year in
India die from drug-resistant
infections as one antibiotic
after another has failed.
>> Drug-resistant forms of
diseases are on the rise
in China because of the
overuse of antibiotics.
>> As much as we're using
antibiotics in the US,
in China, they're using them
about five times more per
person.
That's scary.
>> OK, here we go.
You got your bag?
>> If we got all of our ducks
in a row and we really cut down
on antibiotic use, because
of the enormous use in other
countries, especially in
Asia, we'd still be vulnerable
to superbugs.
>> Nice to see you.
>> I'm Mr. Gut.
[LAUGHTER]
>> So nice to meet you.
When Marty's book
arrived in China,
I was shocked.
I felt the need
to raise awareness
about our disappearing microbes.
Doctors are starting
to accept this theory
and understand the consequences.
>> Prof.
Martin Blaser.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Thank you very
much, Mr. Gut.
I'm very happy to
be here in China.
So today, I talk about
our missing microbes.
I think there are
many causes, but I'm
going to highlight just
one, and that's antibiotics.
>> Colleagues of mine from China
tell me that when they were
growing up and they
had a headache,
their mom would take them to
the pharmacy and they would get
an antibiotic because the idea
was then an antibiotic could
treat anything.
This overuse of
antibiotics in China
came at a time of other
big impacts to our bugs
like eating rich and
fatty foods, more meat,
and moving off of
farms and into cities.
And just like what happened in
the US some decades earlier,
China soon had
dramatic increases
in obesity and other
chronic illnesses.
>> So when the mother
takes antibiotics,
she's changing her microbiota.
She might be affecting the
fetus because of the changes.
>> The C-section rate
in China is about 50%.
That's very high and
could be another factor
in their skyrocketing
disease rates.
You've written about using
vaginal swabs after C-sections.
What percentage
of U.S. hospitals
are using this practice?
>> No hospital are doing it
because we don't know that it
protects the babies against
the risks associated with
C-section.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've been running, running,
running the whole time.
>> I've never repeated
my talk so many times.
>> Vaginally.
Vaginally.
Vaginal birth.
Vagina.
>> Our idea is that these
microbes know how to talk to us
and to receive
conversation back,
and now something has changed.
>> Is this a good shot?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Our next stop is Beijing.
There's a growing body of work
about autism, of the diseases
that affect the brain.
That's the one I'm most
interested in because autism
is a disease of early life.
It has to be forming
in early life.
And the rate of autism
has gone up tremendously.
It's not genes.
Our genes haven't changed,
but something environmental
has changed.
And I think the main
environmental thing
is the microbiome.
We know it's a two-way street.
Your mood and your anxiety
influence your gut.
And now we know more and
more that events in the gut
influence the brain, especially
as driven by microbes.
For example, gut microbes affect
cells in the intestinal wall
that make serotonin.
And that's involved
in brain development
and also helps
regulate emotions.
We call this interplay
the gut-brain axis.
And there are a
number of other people
who are interested
in the same problem.
>> Hi.
Do antibiotics and C-sections
contribute to the rise
of autism?
We believe so, yes.
But we're collecting data
to verify this.
(XIN AND SON SPEAKING MANDARIN)
Three months into my pregnancy,
I got severe bronchitis.
So I had to take penicillin
for about two weeks.
And then I got a C-section
at 34 weeks.
After I learned how important
the microbiome
is to development,
I had regrets.
So as a doctor,
I felt I must do something.
In the spring of 2015,
my son received his first
fecal microbiota transplant.
A few hours after the procedure,
he showed obvious improvements.
That's when I decided to focus
my research on gut microbes.
Actually,
even in the olden days,
we had doctors
who used similar methods.
For example,
Yellow Dragon Soup
was a mixture
of fecal bacteria and urine.
It was used to treat diarrhea.
>> The medical community is
rightfully cautious about FMTs,
but kids with autism often
have intestinal problems.
Many scientists suspect
that their symptoms reflect
differences in the
microbes they carry.
This makes it even more
difficult to educate them
and it affects their behavior.
>> This is the hospital.
Very big and modern hospital.
So we're curious
about the work being
done by doctors around
the world like Dr.
You Xin who are
trying whatever they
can to help families
with sick children who
are really desperate.
>> Your regular work
is rheumatology?
>> Yes, I have to use my spare
time to see these patients.
Food intervention is the first.
>> It's the first thing.
>> No rice.
No wheat.
No food full of carbohydrates.
If there's still huge
limitations for speech,
then we will suggest
to the strong therapy
like fecal transplantation.
>> What Xin is doing is
impressive and important.
3 million children
in China have autism,
and her waiting
list is very long.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(LI AND SON NINGNING
SPEAKING MANDARIN)
Ningning was premature and
was born by C-section.
He was born with
aspiration pneumonia.
It took the strongest
antibiotics to save his life.
I took him for a checkup
when he was two years old.
I was told by the doctor
that he had autism.
(SPEAKING MANDARIN)
His emotional problems
can be very severe.
He can't say
what he feels inside.
He just can't.
Even learning a little bit
would be great,
but he can't control
his emotions.
How can he live without us
in the future?
There is no treatment
that can cure autism.
So I decided
we have to try anything.
(TRUNK CLOSES)
Then a friend introduced me
to Dr. You Xin.
I hope we can help this boy.
His poor complexion means
his digestive system
is not working properly.
She thought that his symptoms
could be related
to his gut microbes.
She suggested we begin
dietary treatment.
It's been two months,
but we haven't seen much change.
So, Dr. You Xin recommended
a fecal microbiota transplant,
and said this treatment
could help him a lot.
(NURSES SPEAKING IN MANDARIN)
Ningning, listen to me,
hold still.
Or they will have to
poke you again.
It's okay, it's fine now.
(MACHINE BEEPING)
-You can go see your child now.
-Okay.
Let him keep sleeping.
Don't wake him up.
If he wakes, the fecal transplant cells
may come out when he moves.
(MACHINERY BEEPING)
They told me
everything went well.
Yes, he needs his rest.
(SLOW THEME MUSIC PLAYS)
>> After we got back from China,
I took a position at Rutgers University.
So I have to move the
collection of microbes.
My collection survived
three hurricanes,
including Sandy in New York,
which was a miracle.
>> Which way are we going?
>> This way.
>> OK.
>> We have to safeguard those
microbes before they go extinct
because one day we will
know which ones we can use
to prevent or cure asthma,
allergies, and other diseases.
>> This way.
I'll open the door for you.
>> It could be worse tidal
waves, political chaos.
We never know what could cut off
our access to isolated peoples
or destroy our collection.
What would we do if we don't
have those microbes anymore?
It's really too much to be on
the shoulders of one person.
>> Did you plug it?
>> Yes.
>> Great.
>> We found that one
freezer was failing,
raising the temperature
and going up and down.
>> If you can find out what's
wrong with this freezer and we
fix it.
>> Yeah, I just got
to call my office.
>> OK.
We have to find ways
to preserve this,
that it's not my
individual responsibility.
>> Just look at the landscape
around us and how remote this
is.
And then jutting out of the
side of this Arctic mountain
is the Svalbard
Global Seed Vault.
>> There is an example,
which is the Crop Trust.
It's a vault of seeds.
And that is very inspiring
because it's the first example
of preserving biodiversity.
They are doing it for seeds
of plants in the world.
We want to do it for
the human microbiome.
>> Hi, how are you doing?
>> Good.
Good to see you again.
>> How did today's
visit go upstairs?
>> Well, I'm already going
to get emotional because I
prepared myself coming in to
have results of the placebo,
but when they weighed me, I
actually gained 4.4 pounds.
>> Well, I'll just cut
to the chase for you.
I guess I'm sad to tell you
that you did get placebo.
As you know, it
was a 50/50 chance.
And I was actually hopeful that
you had gotten the real thing,
so to speak.
And that's definitely
not the case.
>> It's just it's a lot
of time, a lot of work,
a lot of driving, a lot of
lifestyle changes because me
and my husband did want to
start to have another baby,
so we put that on
hold to do this.
And obviously, I
couldn't diet during it.
So it just kind of
backs everything up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think we all have
optimistic viewpoints about
this kind of thing or
we wouldn't be doing it.
It's going to be
helpful for science
to advance our knowledge
of the microbiome
and how it affects people.
>> Stay in touch.
>> I will.
>> On the other hand, it's not
fun telling somebody they got
a placebo when they were hoping
to get the active therapy
in a project like this.
>> I don't have regrets about
doing the clinical trial
because it can make a
difference in someone's life.
>> Unfortunately, we
didn't see any weight loss
of the participants
who received the FMT.
Usually, there is a
series of failures
before you can actually
get to success,
but the important point is
to learn as much as you can
from the failures, try
and figure out, well,
why did we fail?
There's still a lot of
important information
you can glean from
this to design
the next study to be better
and more targeted to move
the field forward.
>> Oh, wow.
That's exciting.
>> Yes, I know.
That's why they're--
>> Cam, what's so
good about today?
>> I get to try a Reese's Peanut
Butter Cup for the first time.
I'm really excited to try it
because I've never exactly
had it before and I never
really had the opportunity.
So yeah, I'm pretty excited.
>> Awesome.
How long have you been waiting
to have a Reese's Peanut Butter
Cup?
>> My whole life probably, yeah.
That's pretty good.
>> High five.
[CHUCKLES]
>> Sorry.
Cut it.
>> It's a commitment.
It takes years to work through
allergies like Cam has.
And it's different
for everybody.
>> Cam couldn't eat so
many things for so long.
He's now turned into what I
would describe as a foodie.
He loves watching cooking shows,
and he has these aspirations
of being a chef.
>> I'm making guacamole.
Yay!
My favorite thing to make.
Get out the whole thing really.
Put it in there.
Get this one here.
Now we're going to smush
this together here until it's
smooth and tasty.
So there you have it.
Thank you for watching
"Cameron's Kitchen."
And here's my
homemade guacamole.
Pretty good.
>> Researchers and biotech firms
are seeing promising results
when desensitization is combined
with targeted probiotics.
And with luck, such
approaches could substitute
for what we have now.
This gives us hope that help
is on the way for the more
than 200 million people
around the world who
suffer from food allergies.
(CROWD BUSTLING)
Ningning has now had six
monthly poop transplants
(ANNOUNCER SPEAKING
IN MANDARIN)
Let's slow down, Mom.
All right. And we'll go home
after this, okay?
Okay.
Hello.
Come, flip over your hand.
The other one.
Play with me.
We've done FMT six times,
what do you think
of the treatment so far?
He has shown
great improvement.
(SPEAKING MANDARIN)
Compared to before,
Ningning talks more.
And he's able to express
what he wants.
His vocabulary is much richer.
Repeat after me, here we go.
(CONTINUES IN MANDARIN)
His teachers
evaluate the students
at the end of the semester.
And Ningning was the student
who has made the most progress.
And the fastest progress.
You can ask Mumu yourself.
Can I kiss you, Mumu?
-May I.
-May I?
May Ningning kiss you?
Yes.
What about the other cheek?
Now you can say,
"We are good friends."
As his abilities increase,
he will be able
to swallow pills.
Then he can take FMT capsules.
Taking FMT capsules is safer.
(SPEAKING MANDARIN)
Up to a few years ago,
I thought autism
was "untreatable."
(SQUEALING)
But our research and research
from the U.S.
have shown exciting results.
I'm hopeful that
in the not too distant future,
the prognosis for autistic children
can be improved.
>> The mysterious coronavirus
has sickened dozens of people
in Asia and is
linked to two deaths.
It's still unclear if the virus
spreads from person to person.
>> At least 132 people have died
in China as a new coronavirus
extends beyond the
country's border.
>> So far, here in America,
there are no known cases.
>> The CDC confirmed the first
person to person transmission
right here in the United States.
>> Several patients are
in critical condition,
already suffering from
underlying health conditions.
>> The US now has more cases
of coronavirus than anywhere
in the world.
>> If there was ever a moment
that the power of microbes
became evident to every person
on the planet, this is it.
>> What's remarkable is
it's an unprecedented time
for scientists working together.
So many scientists
have dropped everything
they're doing to work on
COVID because it's a war
and we've enlisted.
>> We have seen how diabetes
and obesity increase the risk
of having severe COVID
and dying from it.
>> Our microbiome evolved to
defend us against invaders.
And when the microbiome
is perturbed,
we have lost an
important defense.
>> You're going up Sixth
Avenue and not much traffic.
City is empty.
>> We've been collecting samples
from health care workers who
are at high risk of
getting the virus.
>> I see the guy.
Now I see the guy.
>> Over time, we'll compare
the microbes of those who were
infected and had symptoms
with those who had no symptoms
at all.
>> Like many scientists, we are
asking if a healthy microbiome
protects us from the worst
symptoms of the virus.
Questions like this add more
urgency to having a vault
where we can preserve
microbes safely.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hi, my love.
Good morning.
Look how beautiful.
>> Wow.
Very nice.
>> We want a place where
the collection can be safe,
safe from wars, destruction,
events that are catastrophic,
in a neutral country, in a place
where there are no hurricanes
or major earthquakes, hopefully.
>> Not usually.
>> The idea was we
needed to do something,
and it grew and grew.
And it triggered an immediate
response from the press
all over the world.
So we put together an
international team of experts.
And the goal is to have
the vault store collections
from many countries
from many institutions.
>> This old Swiss army
ammunition deposition.
And yeah, so one thing we
have to be a bit mindful of
is that the Swiss army is very
secretive, even though they're
declassified.
The bad news is we're
not actually allowed
to film inside the bunker.
>> The real bunker.
>> Isn't it spectacular just
inside this rock structure?
>> It's salt, calcium salt.
>> Yeah.
>> (SINGING) Ha Ha.
Ha.
Beautiful acoustics.
So there is chamber
1, 2, 3, 3a, 4.
I don't know, this
could be the place.
I think it has
everything we need.
It's exciting to imagine
the microbes may soon
have a safe home and that one
day they may cure or prevent
diseases like diabetes or
asthma or even future diseases.
>> The big question is, what's
the future going to bring?
Are we going to reverse this?
And we need to find and
implement solutions,
desperately.
This is about your kids
and your grandkids.
>> But we believe we're in
the early days of a scientific
revolution that will turn things
around and change the way we
look at the world.
>> Look how those
branches are curved up.
You see that?
>> Yeah.
There is a trail.
>> You can get home from here.
>> Yeah.
>> Bacteria have been the
dominant form of life on Earth.
They're the oldest form of life.
They're the most
numerous form of life.
Everything about human
life depends on bacteria.
And we're just specks
in a bacterial world.
>> Every time we cheat
nature there is a price.
But of course, we do it
because we want to save lives.
So we ask ourselves, how do
we restore what we've lost?
And every day science
brings us closer and closer
to the answers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]